Machine learning and AI algorithms
are increasingly trusted to help with, or
to make, extremely important decisions.
And so we like to make sure that as
much as possible that they're free
of undesirable forms of bias, such as
gender bias, ethnicity bias and so on.
What I want to do in this video is show
you some of the ideas for diminishing or
eliminating these forms of
bias in word embeddings.
When I use the term bias in this video,
I don't mean the bias variants.
Sense the bias, instead I mean gender,
ethnicity, sexual orientation bias.
That's a different sense of bias then is
typically used in the technical discussion
on machine learning.
But mostly the problem,
we talked about how
word embeddings can learn analogies like
man is to woman as king is to queen.
But what if you ask it, man is to
computer programmer as woman is to what?
And so
the authors of this paper Tolga Bolukbasi,
Kai-Wei Chang, James Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and
Adam Kalai found a somewhat horrifying
result where a learned word embedding
might output Man:Computer_Programmer
as Woman:Homemaker.
And that just seems wrong and it enforces
a very unhealthy gender stereotype.
It'd be much more preferable to have
algorithm output man is to computer
programmer as a woman is
to computer programmer.
And they found also,
Father:Doctor as Mother is to what?
And the really unfortunate result is
that some learned word embeddings would
output Mother:Nurse.
So word embeddings can reflect the gender,
ethnicity, age,
sexual orientation, and other biases
of the text used to train the model.
One that I'm especially passionate about
is bias relating to socioeconomic status.
I think that every person,
whether you come from a wealthy family,
or a low income family,
or anywhere in between,
I think everyone should
have great opportunities.
And because machine learning algorithms
are being used to make very important
decisions.
They're influencing everything ranging
from college admissions, to the way people
find jobs, to loan applications, whether
your application for a loan gets approved,
to in the criminal justice system,
even sentencing guidelines.
Learning algorithms are making very
important decisions and so I think it's
important that we try to change learning
algorithms to diminish as much as
is possible, or, ideally, eliminate
these types of undesirable biases.
Now in the case of word embeddings, they
can pick up the biases of the text used
to train the model and so
the biases they pick up or
tend to reflect the biases in
text as is written by people.
Over many decades, over many centuries,
I think humanity has made progress
in reducing these types of bias.
And I think maybe fortunately for AI,
I think we actually have better ideas for
quickly reducing the bias in AI than for
quickly reducing the bias
in the human race.
Although I think we're by no
means done for AI as well and
there's still a lot of research and
hard work to be done to reduce these types
of biases in our learning algorithms.
But what I want to do in this video is
share with you one example of a set
of ideas due to the paper referenced
at the bottom by Bolukbasi and
others on reducing the bias
in word embeddings.
So here's the idea.
Let's say that we've already
learned a word embedding,
so the word babysitter is here,
the word doctor is here.
We have grandmother here,
and grandfather here.
Maybe the word girl is embedded there,
the word boy is embedded there.
And maybe she is embedded here,
and he is embedded there.
So the first thing we're going to
do it is identify the direction
corresponding to a particular bias
we want to reduce or eliminate.
And, for illustration,
I'm going to focus on gender bias but
these ideas are applicable
to all of the other
types of bias that I mention
on the previous slide as well.
And so how do you identify the direction
corresponding to the bias?
For the case of gender, what we can do
is take the embedding vector for he and
subtract the embedding vector for
she, because that differs by gender.
And take e male, subtract e female, and
take a few of these and
average them, right?
And take a few of these differences and
basically average them.
And this will allow you to figure out
in this case that what looks like
this direction is the gender direction,
or the bias direction.
Whereas this direction is unrelated to the
particular bias we're trying to address.
So this is the non-bias direction.
And in this case, the bias direction,
think of this as a 1D subspace whereas
a non-bias direction,
this will be 299-dimensional subspace.
Okay, and I've simplified the description
a little bit in the original paper.
The bias direction can be
higher than 1-dimensional, and
rather than take an average, as I'm
describing it here, it's actually found
using a more complicated algorithm called
a SVU, a singular value decomposition.
Which is closely related to,
if you're familiar with
principle component analysis,
it uses ideas similar to the pc or the
principle component analysis algorithm.
After that,
the next step is a neutralization step.
So for every word that's not definitional,
project it to get rid of bias.
So there are some words that
intrinsically capture gender.
So words like grandmother,
grandfather, girl, boy, she, he,
a gender is intrinsic in the definition.
Whereas there are other
word like doctor and
babysitter that we want
to be gender neutral.
And really, in the more general case,
you might want words like doctor or
babysitter to be ethnicity neutral or
sexual orientation neutral, and
so on, but we'll just use gender
as the illustrating example here.
But so for
every word that is not definitional,
this basically means not words
like grandmother and grandfather,
which really have a very legitimate
gender component, because, by definition,
grandmothers are female,
and grandfathers are male.
So for words like doctor and babysitter,
let's just project them onto this
axis to reduce their components,
or to eliminate their component,
in the bias direction.
So reduce their component in
this horizontal direction.
So that's the second neutralize step.
And then the final step is
called equalization in which
you might have pairs of words
such as grandmother and
grandfather, or girl and
boy, where you want the only
difference in their
embedding to be the gender.
And so, why do you want that?
Well in this example, the distance, or
the similarity, between babysitter and
grandmother is actually
smaller than the distance between
babysitter and grandfather.
And so
this maybe reinforces an unhealthy, or
maybe undesirable, bias that grandmothers
end up babysitting more than grandfathers.
So in the final equalization step,
what we'd like to do is to make sure
that words like grandmother and
grandfather are both exactly the same
similarity, or exactly the same distance,
from words that should be gender neutral,
such as babysitter or such as doctor.
So there are a few linear
algebra steps for that.
But what it will basically
do is move grandmother and
grandfather to a pair of points that are
equidistant from this axis in the middle.
And so the effect of that is that
now the distance between babysitter,
compared to these two words,
will be exactly the same.
And so, in general,
there are many pairs of words like this
grandmother-grandfather, boy-girl,
sorority-fraternity,
girlhood-boyhood, sister-brother,
niece-nephew, daughter-son,
that you might want to carry out
through this equalization step.
So the final detail is,
how do you decide what word to neutralize?
So for example, the word doctor seems
like a word you should neutralize
to make it non-gender-specific or
non-ethnicity-specific.
Whereas the words grandmother and
grandmother should not be
made non-gender-specific.
And there are also words like beard,
right,
that it's just a statistical fact
that men are much more likely to have
beards than women, so maybe beards
should be closer to male than female.
And so what the authors did is
train a classifier to try to figure
out what words are definitional,
what words should be gender-specific and
what words should not be.
And it turns out that most words in
the English language are not definitional,
meaning that gender is not
part of the definition.
And it's such a relatively small subset of
words like this, grandmother-grandfather,
girl-boy, sorority-fraternity, and so
on that should not be neutralized.
And so a linear classifier can tell
you what words to pass through
the neutralization step to
project out this bias direction,
to project it on to this essentially
299-dimensional subspace.
And then, finally,
the number of pairs you want to equalize,
that's actually also relatively small,
and is, at least for the gender example,
it is quite feasible to hand-pick most
of the pairs you want to equalize.
So the full algorithm is a bit more
complicated than I present it here,
you can take a look at the paper for
the full details.
And you also get to play
with a few of these ideas
in the programming exercises as well.
So to summarize, I think that reducing or
eliminating bias of our learning
algorithms is a very important problem
because these algorithms are being asked
to help with or to make more and
more important decisions in society.
In this video I shared
just one set of ideas for
how to go about trying to
address this problem, but
this is still a very much an ongoing area
of active research by many researchers.
So that's it for this week's videos.
Best of luck with this week's
programming exercises and
I look forward to seeing you next week.